is testing at one o'clock on tuesday one o'clock on
tuesday testing testing this is testing two two
two on tuesday two two two on tuesday testing
testing
testing on thursday june 13 testing testing
testing june on wednesday
This is Wednesday, June the 13th, and I am in the
Kleberg building and have the honor and pleasure
of interviewing Dr. Harry Kunkel, a splendid
colleague and distinguished faculty member and
administrator here, about his experience,
experiences, after he came back following his
student days here. Harry, after you graduated
from A&M, briefly describe what happened to you,
your experiences between graduation and when you
came back here as an employee.
We immediately volunteered for immediate
induction and went down to Houston two days after
we graduated. I didn't even go home. And
graduation was when, what year? January 25th or
something of that sort. 1940. 1943. 43. And
we all became in the Army and within a week we got
notice that we had to report for duty and those who
were in the artillery ended up at Fort Sill,
Oklahoma in the Officer Candidate School. And
there were a group of Aggies in that officer
candidate school, and we all went, most of us went
through together and were commissioned in May
1943 and went from there to various places.
Where'd you go? I went to the 65th Division in Camp
Shelby, Mississippi and joined the situation.
But that was the first of my problems. I was
carrying a man piggyback and exercise and I broke a
leg and spent essentially a whole year in medical
situation in the Army and recovery. After that, I
was a casual. That meant I was unassigned to any
unit particularly. And most of the time was in
Jackson, Mississippi and Fort Sill, Oklahoma.
And then after that, I,
as a casual,
was sent to the Pacific I was given a, I'd been in
long enough to get an automatic promotion to first
lieutenant because the time and grade was there.
Eventually spent 50, well, went across the
Pacific in a troop ship. I was in command of 269
black African Americans, which was an
interesting observation, just for thinking.
Mostly from what part of the country? They were all
over the country. I didn't specifically. Became
friends with some of them. Infantry? Well, they
went into various places. I only ran into one or two
after later on. Then I was a casual in the
Philippines right after Manila was taken and got
to go out and see Corregidor with all the Japanese
skulls still lying around and the place
completely scorched with flames and things of the
sort. And from that point I was assigned to the
Americal Division This was the only unnumbered
division in the United States Army.
Why was it unnumbered? Well, it started largely
with a group of units from the National Guard. I
see. And they assembled in New Caledonia, and so
they called it Americans in New Caledonia, a very
Cal division. The patch was the Southern Cross,
blue on blue. I stayed with them, and one evening we
were in Cebu. We
had an officer's class, and we walked out of the
officer's class and down in the enlistment
situation, all heck was breaking loose. Japan had
surrendered.
So we went in as part of the Army of Occupation. And
the units that I transferred to went all the way up
to the northern end of Honshu, across Honshu in
several units, including the 1st Cavalry
Division. How did the civilian population of
Japan react to you Americans?
When we first drove through the streets of
Oklahoma, they hid. They were out of sight. And I
boldly sat up in the back of a jeep and looked around
and looked for them and things of the sort. So no one
said anything, did, threw anything? No, didn't do
anything. And we generally began to get closer and
you'd go in for a conference and the first thing you
would do would hear the hissing sound, which is
their greeting. Oh, that's a positive. Yes. Okay.
Yeah, it's a greeting that the Japanese used at
that particular time. Let's back up just a second.
Do you remember where the circumstances under
which you and your colleagues heard about the
first A-bomb being dropped? Well, we were in Cebu
Island. What was the reaction? I think it was
pretty quiet. Well, okay, they deserved it. We
were fighting the battle. Our unit was
destined to go in in D-4. That's four days before
the main invasion. We were destined to go into
Kyoto as a diversionary end of things while the
major attack was going to be in and around Honshu.
Tokyo,
I suspect, in a particular area. We traveled from
Cebu to Yokohama, and we were in the Tokyo Bay at the
same time the Japanese were on Missouri
surrendering. But we didn't see it.
Did that make any change in the civilian
population in Japan, that ceremony? I suspect it
did. Of course, I didn't know them. They were
generally, you expected the Japanese to be
vicious kinds of people in their fighting, and
they were pretty calm.
and accepted us. We had no particular difficulty.
We generally walked around with a pistol in our
holster. All right, then you're in the occupation
force, and then what after that? Well, I came home
and was released in June. Of 46. 46. And I
immediately came back to Texas A&M and got an
assistantship in animal husbandry with going for
the degree of animal nutrition. And what was your
career goal at that point? Were you hoping to be a
faculty member? I was going to become a faculty
member. I just at that point I had run in my
undergraduate career I had run across Paul
Pearson who
I treasured, and I made contact with him
immediately after it, and he offered me an
assistantship sight unseen, I guess, or he knew
me.
What did that assistantship include? Oh, it
included the opportunity to do research and
seventy-five dollars a month. Now I was rich
because you see the yeah the GI Bill at the GI Bill
and
the
with the $75 in assistantship. That added up to 300
bucks a month, and 300 bucks a month was something
in those days. And you began that when? In
September 1946. Oh, so pretty soon after you got
out. It was immediately. I was offered several
jobs in my hometown, but I decided I was going to go
back. And where did you live here that first fall? I
lived in the dormitory, one of the newer
dormitories over here. Was everything filled up
in the fall of 46? Yes. And you old veterans, I'll
bet, dominated the campus numerically. We
dominated the campus because the young people
hadn't come back and the military was small at that
particular point. Military component was small.
What were your duties as assistant other than to do
research? That was it. I had a research
assistantship. Were you to work on his project, or
could you do your own? Well, basically it was his
project. He had a grant to work on magnesium, the
nutrition of magnesium. And so I began to
essentially work in that particular area. And
then in February, January 1948, with a master's
degree in hand, I went up to Cornell where I had an
assistantship, $125 there a month. And the GI
Bill. And the GI Bill. And what was your research
topic up there? Well, there I was pretty much on my
own, which actually I did a subject on linoleic
acid and its oxidation. Linoleic. Linoleic acid.
Spell that. l-i-n-o-l-e-i-c
linoleic acid it's an 18 carbon two double bond
fatty acid with the two double bonds interrupted
with a methylene group ch group two ch2 group and it
becomes and it's an unstable situation and can be
easily oxidized and I worked with trying to
isolate an enzyme called lipoxidase and work with
colors such as Bixen to see whether or not it could
operate on that particular situation. And what
varieties of animals did this mix? None. This
wasn't bovine? No, it wasn't bovine or animals.
How did Cornell compare in your experiences there
to what you had known here at A&M? Describe Cornell
at that era. Well, Cornell
was an established institution. Texas A&M, from a
graduate standpoint, was fairly new, was
extremely new at that particular point and young.
Well, you know, at the time I graduated, the first,
second, and third PhDs graduated in 1943. So you
can imagine 1946, they didn't have many PhDs
graduating. And so it wasn't until about 1948, 49,
50 that they began to turn out PhDs at this
institution. Are you saying the first PhDs in the
institution? in the institution. Oh, not just in
animal science. No, no. The second and third PhDs
at Texas A&M College were graduated in 1943, the
same time I got my baccalaureate degree. And one of
them was R.E. Patterson. The other was Van Little.
who were the history of Texas A&M was involved in.
Up at Cornell, how well prepared did you find
yourself with your A&M background compared to the
other graduate students you encountered? No, I
had no problem. I was prepared.
Went there with a great deal of confidence. My
major professor was James B. Sumner,
S-U-M-N-E-R, who won the Nobel Prize in 1946. And I
really wished that I had been able to work closer
with him, but somehow I was a person that went off on
my own and probably would have had a better
treatment as far as this is concerned. My
committee consisted of James, Dr. Sumner, Dr.
Jack Loosley, an animal husbandry, I guess,
animal nutrition then, and Dr. H.H. Dukes, who is a
legendary physiologist in veterinary medicine.
How big was the doctoral program in the
department? I guess they had 20 or so students as
far as the doctoral program was concerned. As they
would define it, was it in biochemistry or animal
science? It was biochemistry. I took a degree in
biochemistry. And you finished up when? I
finished up in 1950.
And did you stay up there until then? I stayed up
there till then and in June 1950 I hauled back down
to Texas because I had a post-doctorate
appointment at the University of Wisconsin
Department of Biochemistry and I went back on up
and June the 1st 1946 I became a member of the
faculty as an instructor in the Department of
Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin. Now you
said 46, you meant 50? 50. 50. Yeah, 1950. And how
did Wisconsin compare with Cornell and here? As
far as biochemistry was concerned, you have to
recognize that the Department of Biochemistry in
the latter part of the 1950s was turning out
one-third of the PhDs in biochemistry in the
United States. Wisconsin? Wisconsin, I'm sorry.
Wow. And I, of course, had my doctorate there and
was on the staff. And they did a lot of inbreeding as
far as that's concerned. As a matter of fact, they
said, what year did you get your PhD at Wisconsin? I
didn't do that. And how did you get on the faculty
here? But I had a good time. And then one cold day,
temperature dropped to 42 below zero.
I got a call from Texas A&M University offering me a
job that September, and I said, I'll take it. And
you had not sought it? There was no- Well, I was
nominated, and it was indicated, yes, I would be
interested in the job. But they had, rather than,
you see, I have a strange situation. I have never
taken a job for which I interviewed. I've never
interviewed for the job that I've taken.
And you were to begin then here when? September
1951. Okay, now this is the only money question
we're going to ask about pay at Texas A&M. What was
your beginning compensation as a faculty member?
My beginning compensation as a faculty member at a
12-month basis was $5,200, and it was the highest
paid assistant professor in the university at
that time. And compared to other institutions and
their salaries, how did that compare? As far as you
knew. As far as my salary was concerned, it was
pretty favorable because although as an
instructor, I came out of a $4,800 salary. And you,
when you came back, you were a member of, describe
the department that you... All right, there were
two departments at that particular point in time.
See, in 1947,
The Department of... See, I came here in the fall of
1946 as a graduate student in animal nutrition. In
September 1947, the Department of Biochemistry
and Nutrition was created, and I transferred so
that my master's degree is in biochemistry and
nutrition, one of the first three that was given,
as far as Texas A&M is concerned. So you came back to
that department. Well, so I, then I was in that
department, and so I knew the department. It had
about eight faculty people, and they had about
eight faculty people when I returned in 1951. Who
was the department head? Carl Lyman. Please
describe him. Make believe I didn't know him or
anything about him. Describe him as... Carl Lyman
is, uh, was a quiet person. He had got a PhD at the
University of Pittsburgh and had been involved in
the isolation of pantothenic acid, which is one of
the vitamins.
He worked basically in protein and protein
metabolism and nutrition. He was the department
head. And did he or someone else as you arrived give
you any advice as a junior faculty member? As a
matter of fact, no. I just went in it. I guess that's
not entirely true. A close associate, extremely
close associate, because I was in the same office
with him, was J. Russell Couch. And I listened to
Russell, and he was a flying boy, Anthony. He was
this kind of a person that could get around. And so
in terms of getting grants and things of a sort, I
particularly. As far as you could tell at that
point, were there some guidelines or rules that a
young faculty member was expected to follow,
whether the rules were written or not? No. No. You
see, I was in biochemistry. And I had roots in
Wisconsin and Cornell and research. And science
was, in other words, moving towards science. This
was it. I was not a practical animal husbandman at
that particular point, although I taught the
courses in animal nutrition and did research in
large animals. I was hired. essentially to work in
an animal breeding project to determine whether
or not there could be constituents in the blood or
something, biochemical constituents that were
related to growth and growth rates. Where were you
all quartered and what facilities? We were animal
industries building. I was down below and then
eventually I went up to the third, fourth floor
with a laboratory on the fourth floor which they
had put some air conditioning in for us and I had an
office and shared an office with Jack, with John
Mac Prescott and it was a small office. When, when
did you two share an office? He came a year after I
did. Because
he came from Wisconsin and he got his PhD at
Wisconsin under Esmond Snell, but he had finished
it at the University of Texas as Ed Snell had moved
to the University of Texas. And so he followed him
down there, but the PhD was from the University of
Wisconsin. In terms of rules or guidelines, what I
was thinking of, was it assumed that a faculty
member would be on the job a certain number of hours
a day and would be dressed in a certain
professional manner? Yes. What time did you all
normally get here? We got in about 8 o'clock and
stayed till 5, 6, 7. We spent at least 40 hours a
week, 45 hours. We were often here in the evenings
and doing research unless the temperature got too
hot and things of this sort. Occasionally we'd go
to a movie and because there was no air
conditioning, of course, and the buildings could
get warm.
But fundamentally, we were kind of critical of
everybody else because they didn't stay the extra
hours. They didn't do the extra hours of research
and things of that sort. Well, the biochemistry
here was new. Who were the senior scholars in the
department when you arrived? Well, the ones I
remember mostly, I missed one particularly, who
was Ralph Holman. Holman? Holman. H-O-L-M-A-N?
who came in during the period I was at graduate
school at Cornell and post-doctorate at
Wisconsin. He went up to essentially back home to
Minnesota and has been elected to the National
Academy of Sciences there. Raymond Reiser was
always there. Was he, was he present at that time?
He was present at that time, very much so. Ray
Richardson, L.R. Richardson. Let's digress.
Raymond College. There were about five or six
faculty members, and we called it this, what,
Seven Little Kingdoms, because we were totally
independent of each other, with Mac Prescott, of
course, being one of the things. We were totally
independent of each other. We'd help with each
other. Our graduate students,
faculty would sometimes jump all over the place
and jump on them. And particularly, they made
presentations of seminars and things of the sort.
Seminars used to be on Saturday mornings. Did you
seven though get together in any professional
manner during the day or during the week? No. No,
we... Didn't eat lunch together, didn't go to
coffee together. We didn't eat lunch together.
Because we were a small enough group, we always...
And that seminar was appointed, which we
generally all accumulated together. Let's
digress on Raymond Reiser. When I got here, he... I
soon realized he was kind of the self-appointed
leader of the Jewish community here. Was... Were
there many Jewish faculty members or staff
members? I really don't know. I don't think so, but
I don't know.
All right, back to the mainstream. Did you have any
teaching duties that first year? Yes, I taught
animal nutrition. Is that a... Animal science or
animal husbandry, 303. Animal nutrition. Just
about all animal science majors took it?
Everybody in agriculture took it. How large were
the sections in the early years? Oh, the largest
section I think I had was 165. Describe teaching
that course. What was it like? It was fun. It was in
the auditorium at the, what they call AI building,
animal industries building. and they could go
down and they eventually had one of these roll
situations that you could do with a projection hub
to keep. Apparently I sold myself very well
because within four
years I was named by the Agricultural Council as
the outstanding faculty. That's great. And then
in 1956, five
years after I was here, I got the first of the Farmer
Students Award for teaching. Did you get one the
first year they were given? No, I got it the second
year they were given, which is all right with me
because the stipend was only $500 the first year,
and it was $1,000 the next year.
As a teacher, what were your guidelines that you
had for yourself about teaching? My guidelines, I
guess, for myself, I'm not even sure I really
understood them.
But you must have had some principles. I had some
principles, but the only teaching experience I
had is I took a course in methods of teaching in the
Army. And I used those, and I came in and used those.
And I got to the point where I didn't...
I didn't use any notes. I walked in and started
lecturing.
Did the students think it was a tough course or an
easy course? The students thought it was a tough
course. Did they have a nickname for it? Uncle
Kunkel's Mystery Hour. Uncle Kunkel. So was your
nickname Uncle Kunkel? Uncle Kunkel, yeah. And so
that was known, at least later on, it was known as
Uncle Kunkel's Mystery Hour. But you didn't grade
on the curve. You did grade on it? Oh, sure. Oh,
okay. I did. I always did. And all animal science
majors had to take it? All agriculture majors. All
ag majors. Oh, okay. Okay. Do you remember any
pranks or jokes the students attempted to play on
Uncle Kunkel? Oh, not particularly. walked in one
day and one student was writing Uncle Kunkel's
Mystery Hour on the blackboard. He looked up and
saw me. Then he took off and it seemed for the rest of
the class. But I didn't mind it. You checked the
roll. I checked the roll. Oh, you bet. Attendance
was important as far as I was concerned. It's
always important as long as I taught. And it had a,
did it have a lab? No. Oh, it was all lecture. All
lecture. How many years did you teach it? 11 years.
And did you enjoy the teaching part? Yes, I did.
Because I would have been surprised if you had said
no. I actually taught three other courses. What
were they? I taught enzymes in, or at least half the
course of enzymes with Carl Lyman. in
biochemistry. I taught because, you know, my
major professor had won the Nobel Prize because of
the isolation of urease, which essentially gave
the structure as far as enzymology was concerned,
enzymes was concerned. I taught, of course, in
large animal nutrition. which I drew heavily from
the physiology that I had had at Cornell. And then I
took a course called biochemical genetics. And it
was essentially the first molecular genetics or
molecular biology course ever taught at Texas
A&M. I taught that about the second year that I was
there. It was in plant science department. So I was
teaching in animal husbandry, biochemistry, and
plant sciences.